Blog: 2030-shaped software (#18063)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/2030-shaped-software.md

2. **Understanding and trusting.** Humans will evaluate whether it worked, if it's safe, and what's changed.

"Doing" UI like buttons and forms are going away. They will be replaced with UI that supports the two types of work above. This helps optimize humans' limited time and energy by pointing them where their input actually matters.
## Product infrastructure is agent-first

If a human can do something with your product, agents should be able to do it too. This means complete APIs, an [MCP server](/mcp), tools, and permissions. Build for [agents as a primary surface](/newsletter/agent-first-product-engineering), not an afterthought. 

Missing capabilities are a failure mode. Say you ask an agent to set up an [A/B test](/experiments). It creates the [feature flag](/feature-flags), builds the insight, wires up the events, and stops because you never exposed a tool to create the experiment. It now has to ask you to do that part which defeats the purpose of using agents. 

![Agent-first infrastructure](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/Pasted_image_20260630115314_6ae3550668.png)

> This doesn't mean that tools are all you need. It won't be enough to just let Claude use your product on its own. Relying entirely on a model provider is too much risk. Building your own harness lets you guarantee quality, protect your brand, and make continuous improvements. Even [OpenAI has said](https://openai.com/index/harness-engineering/) that agents have struggled not because they are incapable, but because they lack "the tools, abstractions, and internal structure required to make progress toward high-level goals."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This doesn't mean that tools are all you need. It won't be enough to just let Claude use your product on its own. Relying entirely on a model provider is too much risk. Building your own harness lets you guarantee quality, protect your brand, and make continuous improvements. Even [OpenAI notes](https://openai.com/index/harness-engineering/) that agents struggle not because they are incapable, but because they lack "the tools, abstractions, and internal structure required to make progress toward high-level goals."
```

Finally, what makes your agent special is its context. The model is the same for everyone, your moat is the source code, usage data, customer data, and product skills you feed it. This means [context engineering](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/we-used-ai-to-5x-conversion-and-2x), creating pipelines and flows to get fresh, valuable context to the agents when they need it.  

## Chat is the front door, generative UI inside

> People like to complain about chat as an interface, but we think it's a good one. There's a reason why it's still the primary interface to work with agents and companies are doubling down with products, like Slack apps – have you tried the [PostHog Slack app](/slack)) yet? Telling an agent what's needed and letting it go do it is a powerful interaction method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
People like to complain about chat as an interface, but we think it's a good one. There's a reason why it's still the primary interface to work with agents and companies are doubling down with products, like Slack apps – have you tried the [PostHog Slack app](/slack) yet? Telling an agent what's needed and letting it go do it is a powerful interaction method.
```

It's tempting to make your UI agent-first by removing the buttons, forms, and other parts of the UI that power the doing, but this is a half-measure. Most of this new "read-only" UI can be delivered as text by an agent, making it redundant and misaligned with what humans need the UI for.

Take our feature flags page. The jobs to be done are:

- Is my flag rolled out? 
- To whom? 
- Does it have a payload?
- What type is it?

An agent can answer all these questions in a sentence. You're not verifying the agent's work and there's no decision to be made. You're just checking the flag's state. A 2030 flags page shows how agents change rollouts and previews a pull request to clear up stale flags. 

The question to ask is: **is a human looking at this for trust and judgement, or to act?** If it's an action, give the agent the capability. If it's to trust or judgement, build for that specifically. 

## Be everywhere

Agents don't work like apps. They run on their own, often for a long time. Nobody should have to sit in a browser tab watching them. 2030 products come to their users, no matter if that means [desktop](/code), Slack, mobile, email, API, or voice. 

> These aren't separate products; they're a shared control plane between humans and agents. They're thin clients over a shared backend, so the experience is the same anywhere and the handoff between surfaces is seamless. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These aren't separate products; they're a shared control plane between humans and agents. Thin clients over a shared backend, so the experience is the same anywhere and the handoff between surfaces is seamless. 
```

---
title: 2030-shaped software
date: 2026-06-30
author:
  - ian-vanagas
featuredImage: >-
  https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/Blog_Job_Posts_70bb45215b.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
  - Engineering
  - AI
  - Inside PostHog
---

By 2030, AI agents will be the primary users of software. 

> Many of the conversations and decisions about what we're building now are impacted by this. More and more, we're aiming towards building "2030 shaped software."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many of the conversations and decisions about what we're building now are impacted by this. More and more, we're aiming towards building "2030-shaped software."
```

> Of course, this is a sort of vague aspiration and "agent-first software" isn't much better. We can't predict the future, but we can share our thinking as to what 2030 shaped software will look like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a vague aspiration and "agent-first software" isn't much better. But, while we can't predict the future, we can share how we're thinking about the problem.
```

## Human and agent work is split

The current era of software is designed for humans to do all the work, but in 2030, agents will be the ones **doing**. Agents have shown that they can do the obvious stuff themselves. What does this leave humans to do?

1. **Judging and deciding.** Humans will approve, prioritize, choose direction, and resolve ambiguity.
2. **Understanding and trusting.** Humans will evaluate whether it worked, if it's safe, and what's changed.

"Doing" UI like buttons and forms are going away. They will be replaced with UI that supports the two types of work above. This helps optimize humans' limited time and energy by pointing them where their input actually matters.

> f

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"Doing" UI like buttons and forms are going away. They will be replaced with UI that supports the two types of work above. This helps optimize humans' limited time and energy by pointing them where their input actually matters.
```

## Product infrastructure is agent-first

If a human can do something with your product, agents should be able to do it too. This means complete APIs, an [MCP server](/mcp), tools, and permissions. Build for [agents as a primary surface](/newsletter/agent-first-product-engineering), not an afterthought. 

Missing capabilities are a failure mode. Say you ask an agent to set up an [A/B test](/experiments). It creates the [feature flag](/feature-flags), builds the insight, wires up the events, and stops because you never exposed a tool to create the experiment. It now has to ask you to do that part which defeats the purpose of using agents. 

> ![Agent-first infrastructure](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/Pasted_image_20260630115314_6ae3550668.png)

Reviewer: this is a really nice. we should get a clean version of this made. would work super well for social, too.

maybe this layout would work better (very rough)

<img width="708" height="576" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1880f5b9-6a2d-40a8-936b-2d30d06df8c1" />

Author: haha, this is the clean version that got created for the old newsletter

Reviewer: lol. well, we can remake in build mode style I guess. would be a nice format to have anyway.

This doesn't mean that tools are all you need. It won't be enough to just let Claude use your product on its own. Relying entirely on a model provider is too much risk. Building your own harness lets you guarantee quality, protect your brand, and make continuous improvements. 

> Even [OpenAI has said](https://openai.com/index/harness-engineering/) that early usage of Codex struggled "not because Codex was incapable, but because the environment was underspecified. The agent lacked the tools, abstractions, and internal structure required to make progress toward high-level goals. The primary job of our engineering team became enabling the agents to do useful work."

Reviewer: a long quote here is a bit clumsy. would be better to quote less directly and paraphrase a bit more.

Author: rewrote

Finally, what makes your agent special is its context. The model is the same for everyone, your moat is the source code, usage data, customer data, and product skills you feed it. This means [context engineering](https://newsletter.posthog.com/p/we-used-ai-to-5x-conversion-and-2x), creating pipelines and flows to get fresh, valuable context to the agents when they need it.  

## Chat is the front door, generative UI inside

> As much as people like to complain about chat as an interface, we think it's a good one. There's a reason why it's still the primary interface to work with agents and companies are doubling down with products like Slack apps (see [us](/slack)). Telling an agent what's needed and letting it go do it is a powerful interaction method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
People like to complain about chat as an interface, but we think it's a good one. There's a reason why it's still the primary interface to work with agents and companies are doubling down with products, like Slack apps – have you tried the [PostHog Slack app](/slack)) yet? Telling an agent what's needed and letting it go do it is a powerful interaction method.
```

> But chat isn't enough because sometimes reading a paragraph is worse than glancing at a chart or flicking a toggle. Text can be too low bandwidth as it's flexible but linear; a UI is legible but rigid. Generative UI is in between. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But chat isn't enough because sometimes reading a paragraph is worse than glancing at a chart, or flicking a toggle. Text can be too low bandwidth as it's flexible but linear; a UI is legible but rigid. Generative UI is in between. 
```

![Generative UI](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/w_1600,c_limit,q_auto,f_auto/Pasted_image_20260630140620_c0f8fec2c3.png)

> Most generative UI you will throw away like any particular chat session, but some become artifacts: outputs worth keeping, sharing, and forking. Examples include reports, documents, code, pull requests, configuration, even entire apps. All of them are backed by your app's data. Generative UI is how you work with the agent right now; artifacts are what you walk away with. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most generative UI will be disposable, but some will become artifacts: outputs worth keeping, sharing, and forking. Examples include reports, documents, code, pull requests, configuration, even entire apps. All of them are backed by your app's data. Generative UI is how you work with the agent right now; artifacts are what you walk away with. 
```

## Build UI when text isn't enough

> Text and generative UI cover much of what a product needs, but not everything. Some jobs will continue to need persistent, purpose-built UIs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Text and generative UI cover much of what a product needs, but not everything. Some jobs will continue to need persistent, purpose-built UIs, like:
```

- **Trust and verification surfaces** confirming the agent did what you wanted. Checking work, not doing it.
- **Triage and inbox surfaces** listing decisions that need a human. Approvals, ambiguous calls, unclosed support tickets. 

> The trap is keeping your old UI and just making it read only. This feels like progress as your agent is now doing all the doing, but it's a half-measure. Most of that UI existed to power the doing and now that can be delivered as text by an agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trap is keeping your old UI and just making it read only. This feels like progress because your agent is now doing all the doing, but it's a half-measure. Most of that UI existed to power the doing and now that can be delivered as text by an agent.
```

this para is a bit clumsy and hard to parse. second attempt?

Author: rewrote

Take our feature flags page. The jobs to be done are:

- Is my flag rolled out? 
- To whom? 
- Does it have a payload?
- What type is it?

> Every one of these questions an agent can answer in a sentence. You're not verifying the agent's work and there's no decision to be made. You're just checking the flag's state. A 2030 flags page shows how agents change rollouts and previews a pull requests to clear up stale flags. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An agent can answer all these questions in a sentence. You're not verifying the agent's work and there's no decision to be made. You're just checking the flag's state. A 2030 flags page shows how agents change rollouts and previews a pull request to clear up stale flags. 
```

The question to ask is: **is a human looking at this for trust and judgement, or to act?** If it's an action and give the agent the capability, if it's to trust or judgement, build for that specifically. 

## Be everywhere

> Agents don't work like apps. They run on their own, often for a long time. Nobody shouldn't have to sit in a browser tab watching them. 2030 products come to their users, no matter if that means [desktop](/code), Slack, mobile, email, API, or voice. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Agents don't work like apps. They run on their own, often for a long time. Nobody should have to sit in a browser tab watching them. 2030 products come to their users, no matter if that means [desktop](/code), Slack, mobile, email, API, or voice. 
```

> These aren't separate products; they're a shared control plane between humans and agents. They're thin clients over a shared backend so the experience is the same anywhere and the handoff between surfaces is seamless. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These aren't separate products; they're a shared control plane between humans and agents. They're thin clients over a shared backend, so the experience is the same anywhere and the handoff between surfaces is seamless. 
```

This pushes you towards cloud-first. The real bottleneck when working with agents is concurrency and babysitting. Builders want to run many agents at once, point them at a backlog, and refine the output from anywhere. On-device execution can't do that. 

![Theo cloud agents](https://res.cloudinary.com/dmukukwp6/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/Clean_Shot_2026_06_30_at_14_16_28_a64f928804.png)

Cloud-first only works if all that infrastructure is excellent. Sandboxes need to be rock solid: fast repo imaging, snappy execution, no crashing or freezing. Your app is ubiquitous, your infrastructure invisible. 

> ## Building 2030 shaped software now

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Building 2030-shaped software now
```
